README.md, before:

dapwc
=====

Deterministic Annealing Pairwise Clustering (dapwc) is a scalable and parallel clustering program that operate on non vector space. GitHub page for this project is available at http://dsc-spidal.github.io/dapwc/

Success Stories
-----
* Million Sequence Clustering at http://salsahpc.indiana.edu/millionseq/ 
* The Fungi Phylogenetic Project at http://salsafungiphy.blogspot.com/

Publications
-----
Fox, G. C. Deterministic annealing and robust scalable data mining for the
data deluge. In Proceedings of the Proceedings of the 2nd international
workshop on Petascal data analytics: challenges and opportunities (Seattle,
Washington, USA, 2011). ACM. Available at http://grids.ucs.indiana.edu/ptliupages/publications/pdac24g-fox.pdf

Prerequisites
-----
1. Operating System
  * This program is extensively tested and known to work on,
    *  Red Hat Enterprise Linux Server release 5.10 (Tikanga)
    *  Ubuntu 12.04.3 LTS
    *  Ubuntu 12.10
  * This may work in Windows systems depending on the ability to setup OpenMPI properly, however, this has not been tested and we recommend choosing a Linux based operating system instead.
 
2. Java
  * Download Oracle JDK 8 from http://www.oracle.com/technetwork/java/javase/downloads/index.html
  * Extract the archive to a folder named `jdk1.8.0`
  * Set the following environment variables.
  ```
    JAVA_HOME=<path-to-jdk1.8.0-directory>
    PATH=$JAVA_HOME/bin:$PATH
    export JAVA_HOME PATH
  ```
3. Apache Maven
  * Download latest Maven release from http://maven.apache.org/download.cgi
  * Extract it to some folder and set the following environment variables.
  ```
    MVN_HOME=<path-to-Maven-folder>
    $PATH=$MVN_HOME/bin:$PATH
    export MVN_HOME PATH
  ```
4. Habanero Java (HJ) Library
  * Download HJ-lib jar file from http://www.cs.rice.edu/~vs3/hjlib/code/habanero-java-lib-0.1.1.jar
  * Execute the following shell command from the directory containing the HJ-lib jar to install it as a Maven artifact
  ```sh
    mvn install:install-file -DcreateChecksum=true -Dpackaging=jar -Dfile=habanero-java-lib-0.1.1.jar -DgroupId=habanero-java-lib -DartifactId=habanero-java-lib -Dversion=0.1.1;
  ```
  * Find more information about HJ-lib at https://wiki.rice.edu/confluence/display/PARPROG/Download+and+Set+Up
5. OpenMPI
  * We recommend using `OpenMPI 1.8.1` although it works with the previous 1.7 versions. The Java binding is not available in versions prior to 1.7, hence are not recommended. Note, if using a version other than 1.8.1 please remember to set Maven dependency appropriately in the `pom.xml`.
  * Download OpenMPI 1.8.1 from http://www.open-mpi.org/software/ompi/v1.8/downloads/openmpi-1.8.1.tar.gz
  * Extract the archive to a folder named `openmpi-1.8.1`
  * Also create a directory named `build` in some location. We will use this to install OpenMPI
  * Set the following environment variables
  ```
    BUILD=<path-to-build-directory>
    OMPI_181=<path-to-openmpi-1.8.1-directory>
    PATH=$BUILD/bin:$PATH
    LD_LIBRARY_PATH=$BUILD/lib:$LD_LIBRARY_PATH
    export BUILD OMPI_181 PATH LD_LIBRARY_PATH
  ```
  * The instructions to build OpenMPI depend on the platform. Therefore, we highly recommend looking into the `$OMPI_181/INSTALL` file. Platform specific build files are available in `$OMPI_181/contrib/platform` directory.
  * In general, please specify `--prefix=$BUILD` and `--enable-mpi-java` as arguments to `configure` script. If Infiniband is available (highly recommended) specify `--with-verbs=<path-to-verbs-installation>`. In summary, the following commands will build OpenMPI for a Linux system.
  ```
    cd $OMPI_181
    ./configure --prefix=$BUILD --enable-mpi-java
    make;make install
  ```
  * If everything goes well `mpirun --version` will show `mpirun (Open MPI) 1.8.1`. Execute the following command to instal `$OMPI_181/ompi/mpi/java/java/mpi.jar` as a Maven artifact.
  ```
    mvn install:install-file -DcreateChecksum=true -Dpackaging=jar -Dfile=$OMPI_181/ompi/mpi/java/java/mpi.jar -DgroupId=ompi -DartifactId=ompijavabinding -Dversion=1.8.1
  ```
  * Few examples are available in `$OMPI_181/examples`. Please use `mpijavac` with other parameters similar to `javac` command to compile OpenMPI Java programs. Once compiled `mpirun [options] java -cp <classpath> class-name arguments` command with proper values set as arguments will run the program. 

Building dapwc
-----
* Check all prerequisites are satisfied before building dapwc
* Clone this git repository from `git@github.com:DSC-SPIDAL/dapwc.git` Let's call this directory `dapwchome`
* Once above two steps are completed, building dapwc requires only one command, `mvn install`, issued within `dapwchome`.

Running dapwc
-----
The following shell script may be used with necessary modifications to run the program.
```sh
#!/bin/bash

# Java classpath. This should include paths to dapwc dependent jar files and the dapwc-1.0-ompi1.8.1.jar
# The dependent jar files may be obtained by running mvn dependency:build-classpath command within dapwchome
cp=<classpath>

# Obtain working directory
wd=`pwd`
# Character x as a variable
x='x'

# A text file listing available nodes
hosts=<path-to-hostfile>
# Number of nodes
nodes=<num-nodes>
# Number of cores per node
corespernode=8

# Options for Java runtime
jopts="-Xms64M -Xmx64M"

# Number of threads to use within one dapwc process
tpn=<threads-per-process>
# Number of processes per node
ppn=<processes-per-node>
# Total parallelism expressed as a pattern TxPxN
# where T is number of threads per process, P is processes per node, and N is total nodes
pat=$tpn$x$ppn$x$nodes

echo "Running $pat on `date`" >> status.txt
# Invoke MPI to run dapwc
mpirun --report-bindings --mca btl ^tcp --hostfile $hostfile --map-by node:PE=$(($corespernode / $ppn)) -np $(($nodes*$ppn)) java $jopts -cp $cp edu.indiana.soic.spidal.dapwc.Program -c config$pat.properties -n $nodes -t $tpn | tee $pat/pwc-out.txt
echo "Finished $pat on `date`" >> status.txt
```
The arguments listed in the `mpirun` command fall into three categories.
* OpenMPI Runtime Parameters
  * `--report-bindings` requests OpenMPI runtime to output how processes are mapped to processing elements (cores) in the allocated nodes.
  * `--mca btl ^tcp` instructs to enable transports other than tcp, which is useful when running on Infiniband.
  * `--hostfile` indicates the file listing available nodes. Each node has to be a in a separate line.
  * `--map-by node:PE=$(($corespernode / $ppn))` controls process mapping and binding. This is a topic on its own right, but the specific values in this example requests processes to be mapped by node while binding each to `corespernode/ppn` number of processing elements. A good set of slides on this topic is available at http://www.slideshare.net/jsquyres/open-mpi-explorations-in-process-affinity-eurompi13-presentation
  * `-np $(($nodes*$ppn))` determines the total number of processes to run and in this case it is equal to `nodes*ppn`
* Java Runtime Parameters
  * `$jopts` in this case lists initial and maximum heap sizes for a JVM instance. 
  * `-cp` indicates paths to find required classes where each entry is separated by a `:` (in Linux)
* Program (dapwc) Parameters
  * `-c` points to the configuration file. This is a Java properties files listing values for each parameter that dapwc requires. Details on these parameters will follow in a later section.
  * `-n` indicates the total number of nodes
  * `-t` denotes the number of threads to use within one instance of dapwc

Configuring dapwc
-----
The following table summarizes the parameters used in dapwc.

| Parameter | Description | Default Value | Type |
|----------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------|---------------|-----------------------------------------|
| ClusterFile | Path to output cluster results. | n/a | String |
| DistanceMatrixFile | Path to pairwise distance file. | n/a | String |
| AddMdsFile |  | n/a | String |
| ClusterNumberFile |  | n/a | String |
| CenterPlotFile |  | n/a | String |
| LabelFile |  | n/a | String |
| TimingFile | Path to output timing information. | n/a | String |
| SummaryFile | Path to output summary file. | n/a | String |
| NumberDataPoints | Total number of data points | n/a | Integer |
| ProcessingOption  | Mode of operation. | 0 | Integer |
| TransformDimension | Transforms input distances to the given dimension. | 4 | Integer |
| MaxNcent  | Maximum number of clusters to find. | n/a | Integer |
| SplitOrExpandIt |  | 1 | Integer |
| MPIIOStrategy |  | 0 | Integer |
| TooSmallToSplit |  | 5 | Integer |
| MinEigTest |  | -0.01 | Double |
| ConvergeIntermediateClusters |  | false | Boolean |
| WaitIterations |  | 10 | Integer |
| EpsiMaxChange |  | 0.001 | Double |
| InitialCoolingFactor |  | 0.9 | Double |
| FineCoolingFactor |  | 0.99 | Double |
| EigenValueChange |  | 0.001 | Double |
| EigenVectorChange |  | 0.001 | Double |
| IterationAtEnd |  | 2000 | Integer |
| ConvergenceLoopLimit |  | 2000 | Integer |
| FreezingLimit |  | 0.002 | Double |
| PowerIterationLimit |  | 200 | Integer |
| ContinuousClustering |  | false | Boolean |
| AddMds |  | 1 | Integer |
| CenterPointsPerCenterTypeInOuput |  | 3 | Integer |
| BucketFractions |  | 0.15,0.4,0.75 | String of comma separated double values |
| NumberOfCenters | Maximum number of centers to find for each cluster. | 8 | Integer |
| DebugPrintOption |  | 1 | Integer |
| ConsoleDebugOutput | Flag to enable console output. | true | Boolean |
| DataTypeSize | Indicates the data type size in bytes for the binary distances. | 2 | Integer |
| IsBigEndian | Indicates the endianness of the binary distance file.  | false | Boolean |

Acknowledgement
-----
We like to express our sincere gratitude to Prof. Vivek Sarkar 
and his team at Rice University for giving us access and 
continuous support for HJ library. We are equally thankful to Prof. Guillermo L�pez Taboada for giving us free unrestricted access to commercially available FastMPJ MPI library, which we evaluated in an earlier internal version. We are also 
thankful to FutureGrid project and its support team for their support with HPC systems. Last but not least OpenMPI community deserves equal recognition for their valuable support.

We also like to thank the following companies for providing us Open Source licences for their profiler software.

![alt text][jprofiler logo]
 - ej-technologies the creator of JProfiler  (http://www.ej-technologies.com/products/jprofiler/overview.html)

![alt text][yourkit logo]
 - YourKit supports open source projects with its full-featured Java Profiler. YourKit, LLC is the creator of [YourKit Java Profiler](https://www.yourkit.com/java/profiler/index.jsp) and [YourKit .NET Profiler](https://www.yourkit.com/.net/profiler/index.jsp), innovative and intelligent tools for profiling Java and .NET applications


[jprofiler logo]: https://www.ej-technologies.com/images/product_banners/jprofiler_medium.png
[yourkit logo]: https://www.yourkit.com/images/yklogo.png

Commit message:

adding instructions to resolve build issue due to SSL certificate

README.md, after:

dapwc
=====

Deterministic Annealing Pairwise Clustering (dapwc) is a scalable and parallel clustering program that operate on non vector space. GitHub page for this project is available at http://dsc-spidal.github.io/dapwc/

Success Stories
-----
* Million Sequence Clustering at http://salsahpc.indiana.edu/millionseq/ 
* The Fungi Phylogenetic Project at http://salsafungiphy.blogspot.com/

Publications
-----
Fox, G. C. Deterministic annealing and robust scalable data mining for the
data deluge. In Proceedings of the Proceedings of the 2nd international
workshop on Petascal data analytics: challenges and opportunities (Seattle,
Washington, USA, 2011). ACM. Available at http://grids.ucs.indiana.edu/ptliupages/publications/pdac24g-fox.pdf

Prerequisites
-----
1. Operating System
  * This program is extensively tested and known to work on,
    *  Red Hat Enterprise Linux Server release 5.10 (Tikanga)
    *  Ubuntu 12.04.3 LTS
    *  Ubuntu 12.10
  * This may work in Windows systems depending on the ability to setup OpenMPI properly, however, this has not been tested and we recommend choosing a Linux based operating system instead.
 
2. Java
  * Download Oracle JDK 8 from http://www.oracle.com/technetwork/java/javase/downloads/index.html
  * Extract the archive to a folder named `jdk1.8.0`
  * Set the following environment variables.
  ```
    JAVA_HOME=<path-to-jdk1.8.0-directory>
    PATH=$JAVA_HOME/bin:$PATH
    export JAVA_HOME PATH
  ```
3. Apache Maven
  * Download latest Maven release from http://maven.apache.org/download.cgi
  * Extract it to some folder and set the following environment variables.
  ```
    MVN_HOME=<path-to-Maven-folder>
    $PATH=$MVN_HOME/bin:$PATH
    export MVN_HOME PATH
  ```
4. Habanero Java (HJ) Library
  * Download HJ-lib jar file from http://www.cs.rice.edu/~vs3/hjlib/code/habanero-java-lib-0.1.1.jar
  * Execute the following shell command from the directory containing the HJ-lib jar to install it as a Maven artifact
  ```sh
    mvn install:install-file -DcreateChecksum=true -Dpackaging=jar -Dfile=habanero-java-lib-0.1.1.jar -DgroupId=habanero-java-lib -DartifactId=habanero-java-lib -Dversion=0.1.1;
  ```
  * Find more information about HJ-lib at https://wiki.rice.edu/confluence/display/PARPROG/Download+and+Set+Up
5. OpenMPI
  * We recommend using `OpenMPI 1.8.1` although it works with the previous 1.7 versions. The Java binding is not available in versions prior to 1.7, hence are not recommended. Note, if using a version other than 1.8.1 please remember to set Maven dependency appropriately in the `pom.xml`.
  * Download OpenMPI 1.8.1 from http://www.open-mpi.org/software/ompi/v1.8/downloads/openmpi-1.8.1.tar.gz
  * Extract the archive to a folder named `openmpi-1.8.1`
  * Also create a directory named `build` in some location. We will use this to install OpenMPI
  * Set the following environment variables
  ```
    BUILD=<path-to-build-directory>
    OMPI_181=<path-to-openmpi-1.8.1-directory>
    PATH=$BUILD/bin:$PATH
    LD_LIBRARY_PATH=$BUILD/lib:$LD_LIBRARY_PATH
    export BUILD OMPI_181 PATH LD_LIBRARY_PATH
  ```
  * The instructions to build OpenMPI depend on the platform. Therefore, we highly recommend looking into the `$OMPI_181/INSTALL` file. Platform specific build files are available in `$OMPI_181/contrib/platform` directory.
  * In general, please specify `--prefix=$BUILD` and `--enable-mpi-java` as arguments to `configure` script. If Infiniband is available (highly recommended) specify `--with-verbs=<path-to-verbs-installation>`. In summary, the following commands will build OpenMPI for a Linux system.
  ```
    cd $OMPI_181
    ./configure --prefix=$BUILD --enable-mpi-java
    make;make install
  ```
  * If everything goes well `mpirun --version` will show `mpirun (Open MPI) 1.8.1`. Execute the following command to instal `$OMPI_181/ompi/mpi/java/java/mpi.jar` as a Maven artifact.
  ```
    mvn install:install-file -DcreateChecksum=true -Dpackaging=jar -Dfile=$OMPI_181/ompi/mpi/java/java/mpi.jar -DgroupId=ompi -DartifactId=ompijavabinding -Dversion=1.8.1
  ```
  * Few examples are available in `$OMPI_181/examples`. Please use `mpijavac` with other parameters similar to `javac` command to compile OpenMPI Java programs. Once compiled `mpirun [options] java -cp <classpath> class-name arguments` command with proper values set as arguments will run the program. 

Building dapwc
-----
* Check all prerequisites are satisfied before building dapwc
* Clone this git repository from `git@github.com:DSC-SPIDAL/dapwc.git` Let's call this directory `dapwchome`
* Once above two steps are completed, building dapwc requires only one command, `mvn install`, issued within `dapwchome`.

Note : If you have not built https://github.com/DSC-SPIDAL/common library locally please follow the following instructions

Please follow the following instructions to build this project with maven
This is needed because of an SSL certificate issue with a dependency maven repo

execute the following commands from the root directory of the repo

```
keytool -import -file ./resources/ricecert/cs.rice.edu.cer -keystore /tmp/riceKeyStore
```

You can change the name of the key store and the path to it if you prefer to.
This command will first ask for a password, provide any password of your choosing with at least 6 characters
then it will show the following

```
Trust this certificate? [no]: 
```

type "y" and then press enter. Now the cert has been properly installed.
Next use the following command to compile the code

```
mvn -Djavax.net.ssl.trustStore=/tmp/riceKeyStore clean install
```

Running dapwc
-----
The following shell script may be used with necessary modifications to run the program.
```sh
#!/bin/bash

# Java classpath. This should include paths to dapwc dependent jar files and the dapwc-1.0-ompi1.8.1.jar
# The dependent jar files may be obtained by running mvn dependency:build-classpath command within dapwchome
cp=<classpath>

# Obtain working directory
wd=`pwd`
# Character x as a variable
x='x'

# A text file listing available nodes
hosts=<path-to-hostfile>
# Number of nodes
nodes=<num-nodes>
# Number of cores per node
corespernode=8

# Options for Java runtime
jopts="-Xms64M -Xmx64M"

# Number of threads to use within one dapwc process
tpn=<threads-per-process>
# Number of processes per node
ppn=<processes-per-node>
# Total parallelism expressed as a pattern TxPxN
# where T is number of threads per process, P is processes per node, and N is total nodes
pat=$tpn$x$ppn$x$nodes

echo "Running $pat on `date`" >> status.txt
# Invoke MPI to run dapwc
mpirun --report-bindings --mca btl ^tcp --hostfile $hostfile --map-by node:PE=$(($corespernode / $ppn)) -np $(($nodes*$ppn)) java $jopts -cp $cp edu.indiana.soic.spidal.dapwc.Program -c config$pat.properties -n $nodes -t $tpn | tee $pat/pwc-out.txt
echo "Finished $pat on `date`" >> status.txt
```
The arguments listed in the `mpirun` command fall into three categories.
* OpenMPI Runtime Parameters
  * `--report-bindings` requests OpenMPI runtime to output how processes are mapped to processing elements (cores) in the allocated nodes.
  * `--mca btl ^tcp` instructs to enable transports other than tcp, which is useful when running on Infiniband.
  * `--hostfile` indicates the file listing available nodes. Each node has to be a in a separate line.
  * `--map-by node:PE=$(($corespernode / $ppn))` controls process mapping and binding. This is a topic on its own right, but the specific values in this example requests processes to be mapped by node while binding each to `corespernode/ppn` number of processing elements. A good set of slides on this topic is available at http://www.slideshare.net/jsquyres/open-mpi-explorations-in-process-affinity-eurompi13-presentation
  * `-np $(($nodes*$ppn))` determines the total number of processes to run and in this case it is equal to `nodes*ppn`
* Java Runtime Parameters
  * `$jopts` in this case lists initial and maximum heap sizes for a JVM instance. 
  * `-cp` indicates paths to find required classes where each entry is separated by a `:` (in Linux)
* Program (dapwc) Parameters
  * `-c` points to the configuration file. This is a Java properties files listing values for each parameter that dapwc requires. Details on these parameters will follow in a later section.
  * `-n` indicates the total number of nodes
  * `-t` denotes the number of threads to use within one instance of dapwc

Configuring dapwc
-----
The following table summarizes the parameters used in dapwc.

| Parameter | Description | Default Value | Type |
|----------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------|---------------|-----------------------------------------|
| ClusterFile | Path to output cluster results. | n/a | String |
| DistanceMatrixFile | Path to pairwise distance file. | n/a | String |
| AddMdsFile |  | n/a | String |
| ClusterNumberFile |  | n/a | String |
| CenterPlotFile |  | n/a | String |
| LabelFile |  | n/a | String |
| TimingFile | Path to output timing information. | n/a | String |
| SummaryFile | Path to output summary file. | n/a | String |
| NumberDataPoints | Total number of data points | n/a | Integer |
| ProcessingOption  | Mode of operation. | 0 | Integer |
| TransformDimension | Transforms input distances to the given dimension. | 4 | Integer |
| MaxNcent  | Maximum number of clusters to find. | n/a | Integer |
| SplitOrExpandIt |  | 1 | Integer |
| MPIIOStrategy |  | 0 | Integer |
| TooSmallToSplit |  | 5 | Integer |
| MinEigTest |  | -0.01 | Double |
| ConvergeIntermediateClusters |  | false | Boolean |
| WaitIterations |  | 10 | Integer |
| EpsiMaxChange |  | 0.001 | Double |
| InitialCoolingFactor |  | 0.9 | Double |
| FineCoolingFactor |  | 0.99 | Double |
| EigenValueChange |  | 0.001 | Double |
| EigenVectorChange |  | 0.001 | Double |
| IterationAtEnd |  | 2000 | Integer |
| ConvergenceLoopLimit |  | 2000 | Integer |
| FreezingLimit |  | 0.002 | Double |
| PowerIterationLimit |  | 200 | Integer |
| ContinuousClustering |  | false | Boolean |
| AddMds |  | 1 | Integer |
| CenterPointsPerCenterTypeInOuput |  | 3 | Integer |
| BucketFractions |  | 0.15,0.4,0.75 | String of comma separated double values |
| NumberOfCenters | Maximum number of centers to find for each cluster. | 8 | Integer |
| DebugPrintOption |  | 1 | Integer |
| ConsoleDebugOutput | Flag to enable console output. | true | Boolean |
| DataTypeSize | Indicates the data type size in bytes for the binary distances. | 2 | Integer |
| IsBigEndian | Indicates the endianness of the binary distance file.  | false | Boolean |

Acknowledgement
-----
We like to express our sincere gratitude to Prof. Vivek Sarkar 
and his team at Rice University for giving us access and 
continuous support for HJ library. We are equally thankful to Prof. Guillermo L�pez Taboada for giving us free unrestricted access to commercially available FastMPJ MPI library, which we evaluated in an earlier internal version. We are also 
thankful to FutureGrid project and its support team for their support with HPC systems. Last but not least OpenMPI community deserves equal recognition for their valuable support.

We also like to thank the following companies for providing us Open Source licences for their profiler software.

![alt text][jprofiler logo]
 - ej-technologies the creator of JProfiler  (http://www.ej-technologies.com/products/jprofiler/overview.html)

![alt text][yourkit logo]
 - YourKit supports open source projects with its full-featured Java Profiler. YourKit, LLC is the creator of [YourKit Java Profiler](https://www.yourkit.com/java/profiler/index.jsp) and [YourKit .NET Profiler](https://www.yourkit.com/.net/profiler/index.jsp), innovative and intelligent tools for profiling Java and .NET applications


[jprofiler logo]: https://www.ej-technologies.com/images/product_banners/jprofiler_medium.png
[yourkit logo]: https://www.yourkit.com/images/yklogo.png
